prevesti na ms:
- budu
- ostalo
- spojiti: sve je moguce onom ko veruje + pomeranje gore

Isus -> Ješua
možda ot -> od
negde jako -> ibo
toma kaže -> glagolju
prijd -> dojd

ě

--------------------
James Robson, Christ in Islam ()

A., 5; M., 10.
Learned men who are evil are like a rock which has fallen at the mouth of a river; it does not drink the water, and it does not let the water flow to the field.

Zli učenjaci su poput stene koja je pala u ušće reke. Ona ne pije vodu, a ne dopušta vodi teći u polje.

Learned men who are evil are like the pipe of a lavatory whose outside is plaster, but whose inside is stench.

Zli učenjaci su kao cevi zahoda čija vanjština je okrečena, ali unutra je smrad.

And they are like graves whose outside is flourishing, but whose inside is dead men's bones.

Zli učenjaci su poput grobova koji spolja cvetaju, ali unutra su kosti mrtvaca.

A., 8.
He who acquires knowledge and does not act upon it is like a woman who practises immorality in secret, then becomes pregnant and her pregnancy becomes apparent and she is covered with shame. Thus shall God cover with shame on the Day of Resurrection in the sight of witnesses him who does not act upon his knowledge.

Ko ima znanje i ne postupa po njemu nalik je ženi koja tajno bludniči, zatim zatrudni i njena trudnoća postane očigledna i osramoti je.

A., 15; M., 16.
Isus reče,
Make yourselves lovable to God by hating the disobedient, and come near to God by keeping away from them, and seek God's favour by being displeased with them.
They said,
O Jesus, with whom, then, shall we associate?
He said,
Associate with him the sight of whom reminds you of God, whose words increase your works, and whose works make you desire the next world.


Isus reče:
Približite se Bogu držeći se podalje od nepokornih.
Rekli su:
O Isuse, sa kim ćemo se onda družiti?
On reče:
Družite se sa onim čiji vas prizor podseća na Boga, čije reči uvećavaju vaša dela i čija dela čine da želite sledeći svet.

A., 16; M., 17.
Isus reče to the disciples,
How would you act if you saw your brother asleep and the wind had blown his cloak off him?
They said,
We should cover and conceal him.
He said,
Nay, you would uncover his nakedness.
They said,
God forbid! Who would do this?
Then he said,
One of you hears something about his brother, then adds to it and spreads it with an addition.


Isus reče učenicima:
Kako biste postupili kada biste videli usnulog brata kome je vetar oduvao plašt?
Oni rekoše:
Pokrili bismo ga.
On reče:
Ne, vi biste razotkrili njegovu golotinju.
Oni rekoše:
Ne daj Bože! Ko bi to uradio?
On reče:
Neki od vas čuju nešto o svom bratu, a zatim dodaju i šire.

A., 23; M., 27.
Beware of looking, for it sows desire in the heart, and it is sufficient for seduction.

Pazite se gledanja jer seje želju u srcu i dovoljno je za zavođenje.

A., 25; M., 28.
Some people said to Jesus:
Direct us to some work by which we shall enter Paradise.
He said:
Never say anything.
They said:
We are not able to do that.
So he said:
Then never say anything but what is good.

Neki ljudi rekoše Isusu:
Usmerite nas na neko delo pomoću kojeg ćemo ući u raj.
On reče:
Nikad ništa ne govori.
Oni rekoše:
Mi nismo to u stanju.
Pa reče:
Onda nikada ništa ne govori, osim ono što je dobro.

A., 27; M., 30.
If one tells many lies, his beauty departs; and if one quarrels with men, his manliness falls to the ground; and if one has many cares, his body becomes ill; and if one has bad manners, he punishes himself.

Ko mnogo laže, lepota ga napušta; i ko se spori sa ljudima, njegova ljudskost pada na zemlju; i ko ima mnogo briga, njegovo telo se razboli; i ko se loše ponaša, kažnjava sebe.

A., 51; M., 53.
Isus reče,
Seek a great amount of what fire cannot consume.
Someone said,
And what is that?
He said,
Kindness.

Isus je rekao:
Tražite veliku količinu onoga što vatra ne može pojesti.
Neko je rekao:
A šta je to?
Rekao je:
Dobrota.

A., 59; M., 56.
Verily the seed grows on level ground and does not grow on a rock; similarly wisdom works in the heart of the humble but does not work in the heart of the proud. Do you not see that if one raises his head to the roof it breaks it; but if one bends down it (roof) shades him and covers him?

Zaista, seme raste na ravnom tlu, ne na kamenu. Slično, mudrost dela u srcu poniznih, ne u srcu gordih. Zar ne vidite da ako neko podigne glavu do krova, slimi ga, ali ako se sagne, krov ga prekrije i zasjeni?

A., 62.--
The disciples said to the Messiah:
Look at this mosque, how beautiful it is!
Then he said,
My people, my people, verily I say unto you, God will not leave one stone of this mosque standing on another, but will destroy it for the sins of its people. Verily God does not pay any heed to gold, or silver, or these stones which charm you. The things dearest to God are the pure hearts. With them God preserves the earth, and with them He destroys it if they are otherwise.

Učenici su rekli Mesiji:
Pogledajte ovaj hram, kako je lep!
On reče:
Istinu vam kažem, Bog neće ostaviti ni kamen na kamenu od ovog hrama. Jer Bog ne obraća pažnju na zlato ili srebro ili ovo kamenje koje vas dojmi. Bogu su najdraža čista srca.

A., 94; M., 72.--
The disciples said to Jesus:
What is the purest of deeds?
Then he replied,
him who works for God not wishing anyone to praise him for it.

Učenici su rekli Isusu:
Šta je najčistije delo?
Zatim je odgovorio:
onaj koji radi za Boga ne želeći da ga iko pohvali zbog toga.

A., 104.--
They saw him coming out of a prostitute's house, then someone said to him,
O Jesus, what are you doing with this woman?
He replied,
The doctor comes only to the sick.

Videli su ga kako izlazi iz kuće prostitutke, a onda mu neko reče:
O Isuse, šta radiš sa ovom ženom?
On je odgovorio,
Lekar dolazi samo bolesnima.

A., 112.--
Isus reče to the disciples,
Do not consider men's works as though you were lords, but consider your own works as though you were servants.
Ne gledajte dela ljudi kao da ste gospodari, ali gledajte svoja dela kao da ste sluge.

A., 127.--
Jesus passed some dyers and stopped beside them and said to them,
Do you think that when you have washed and purified and whitened these clothes, their owners will be right in putting them on while their bodies are soiled with blood and urine and excrement and various kinds of filthiness?
They replied,
No, the one who did that would be foolish.
He said,
You yourselves have done it. Because you have purified your bodies and whitened your clothes while your souls are soiled with rottenness, full of filthiness from ignorance and blindness and dumbness and evil manners and envy and hatred and guile and deceit and covetousness and niggardliness and wickedness and evil thoughts and the pursuit of evil desires, and you are in the abasement of slavery.

Isus prođe neke farbare, stade pored njih i reče im:
Mislite li da će, kada izbelite ovu odeću, njihovi vlasnici biti čisti kada je obuku preko tela prljavih od krvi i urina, izmeta i različitih nečistoća?
Oni odgovoriše:
Ne, ko bi to učinio bio bi glup.
On reče:
Vi to radite. Zato što čistite svoja tela i izbeljujete odeću dok su vam duše pune nečistoće.

A., 130.--
Isus reče to his disciples,
The sign by which you are known as being from me is that you love one another.

Isus je rekao svojim učenicima:
Znak po kome ste znani da ste od mene je da volite jedni druge.

A., 130.--
Isus reče:
As regards the Lord, you must love him with all your heart, then love your neighbour as you love yourself.
They said to him,
Explain to us, what is the difference between these two loves, so that we may prepare for them with discernment and clearness.
He said,
You love your friend for yourself, and you love yourself for your Lord; so when you guard your friend you do it for yourself, and when you are bountiful yourself you are so towards your Lord.

Isus je rekao:
Što se tiče Gospoda, morate ga voljeti svim svojim srcem, a zatim ljubiti bližnjega kao što volite sebe.
Rekli su mu:
Objasnite nam koja je razlika između ove dve ljubavi.
Rekao je:
Vi volite svog prijatelja za sebe, a vi volite sebe za svog Gospodara; pa kada čuvate svog prijatelja, to radite za sebe, a kada krotite sebe, to radite za svog Gospodara.

A., 132.--
Isus reče to the disciples,
O salt of the earth, do not become bad, for when things become bad they can be treated only with salt, but when salt becomes bad it cannot be treated with anything.

Isus je rekao učenicima:
O sol zemlje, nemojte postati loši, jer kada stvari postanu loše, mogu se popraviti samo solju, ali kada sol postane loša, ne može se popraviti ničim.

A., 141.
O son of man, as you show pity so will you be pitied; for how can you hope that God will pity you if you do not show pity to His servants?

Sine ljudski, kao što pokazuješ sažaljenje tako će ti se i sažaliti; jer kako se možeš nadati da će te bog sažaliti ako ne pokažeš sažaljenje za njegove sluge?

A., 144.
What is the use of a blind man carrying a lamp while others get light from it? And what is the use of a dark house having a lamp on its roof? And what is the use of your speaking with wisdom and not acting with it?

Kakva je korist slepcu nositi lampu, dok drugi od njega dobijaju svetlost? I kakva je korist tamnoj kuću koja ima lampu na krovu? I kakva je korist od vašeg mudrog govora, a ne delanja u skladu sa tim?

A., 157.--
Isus reče,
If you are able to be simple like a dove concerning God, then do so; nothing is more simple than a dove. You may take its two young from under it and kill them, and it will return to that very place and bring forth [others] in it.

Ako ste u stanju da budete jednostavni poput golubice u vezi sa Bogom, onda to učinite; ništa nije jednostavnije od golubice. Možete uzeti dva njena mlada ispod nje i ubiti ih, i ona će se vratiti na to mesto i snijeti druge u njemu.

A., 158.--
Isus reče,
Speak much to God and speak little to men.
They said,
How shall we speak much to God?
He said,
Be apart in intercourse with Him; be apart in prayer to Him.

Isus je rekao:
Govorite mnogo bogu i malo govorite ljudima.
Rekli su,
Kako ćemo mnogo razgovarati s bogom?
Rekao je,
Budite odvojeni u odnosima sa njim; budite odvojeni u molitvi njemu.


M., 2.--
Isus reče: The world is a place of transition, full of examples; be pilgrims therein, and take warning by the traces of those that have gone before.

Isus je rekao: Svet je mesto prelaska, puno primera. Budite prolaznici u njemu i upozorite se tragovima onih koji su prošli ​​ranije.

A., 6; M., 11.--
Isus reče,
How can he be one of the learned whose journey is towards the next world and who is turning towards the way of the present world? And how can he be one of the learned who seeks words to report them, and not to act according to them?

Kako može neko od učenih koji putuje ka sledećem svetu da se okreće prema putu ovog sveta? I kako može neko od učenih tražiti reči da ih izlaže, a ne da postupa u skladu s njima?

A., 20; M., 24.--
Isus reče,
Blessed is he who abandons a present desire for a distant promise which he has not seen.

Blago onome ko napusti sadašnju želju za daleko obećanje koje nije vidio.

A., 21; M., 25.--
Isus reče,
Make your livers hungry and your bodies naked; perhaps your hearts may see God.

Neka vaša jetra bude gladna i tela gola; možda vaša srca mogu videti Boga.

A., 34; M., 35.--
Isus reče,
Do not take the world as a master, for it will take you as slaves. Lay up your treasure with him who will not lose it, for he who possesses treasure in this world fears lest some calamity may come upon it, but he who possesses God's treasure has no fear of calamity coming upon it.

Ne uzimajte svijet kao gospodara, jer će vas uzeti kao robove. Položite svoje blago sa njim koji ga neće izgubiti. Jer, onaj ko ima blago na ovom svetu, boji se da se ne bi dogodila neka nesreća, ali onaj ko poseduje božje blago, nema straha od nevolja koje dolaze.

A., 34; M., 36.--
And he said,
O company of the disciples, I have overturned the world for you on its face, so do not raise it up after me. For part of the wickedness of the world is that disobedience to God is in it; and part of the wickedness of the world is that the next world is attained only by abandoning it. Therefore pass through the world, but do not stay in it; and know that the root of all sin is the love of the world.

O društvo učenika, preovrnuo sam svet za vas na njegovo lice, zato ga ne dižite za mnom. Jer, deo zloće sveta je da je neposlušnost bogu u njemu. A deo zloće sveta je da se sledeći svet postiže samo napuštanjem njega. Zato prođite kroz svet, ali ne ostajte u njemu; i znajte da je koren svih greha ljubav prema svetu.

A., 35; M., 39.--
Isus reče,
The love of this world and of the next cannot stay in the heart of a believer, just as water and fire cannot stay in one vessel.

Ljubav prema ovom svetu i prema sledećem ne može ostati u srcu verujućeg, kao što voda i vatra ne mogu ostati u jednoj posudi.

A., 36; M., 40.--
Someone said to Jesus,
If you were to take a house to cover you [it would be good].
He replied,
The rags of those who lived before us are sufficient for us.

Neko je rekao Isusu:
Ako bi uzeo kuću da vas pokriva [bilo bi dobro].
On je odgovorio,
Krpe onih koji su živeli pre nas su nam dovoljne.

A., 38; M., 42.--
Isus reče,
Woe to him who loves the world! How can he die and leave it and what is in it! It deceives him, yet he trusts in it and puts his confidence in it and he is taken away. And woe to those who are deceived!

How what they abhor has caused dissension among them, and what they like has left them, and what they were threatened with has come to them!

And woe to him whose care is the world, and whose work is sins! How he shall be covered with shame to-morrow for his offence!

Jao onome koji voli svet! Kako može umreti i ostaviti ga i šta je u njemu! To ga zavara, ali on veruje u to i veruje u to i on mu se oduzima. Jao onima koji su prevareni!

Kako je ono čega su se gadili izazvala razdor među njima, i ono što im se sviđalo ih je napustio, i ono što im je pretilo je došla do njih!

Jao onome ko brine za svet i čije su delo grijesi! Kako će sutra biti prekriven sramotom zbog svog prestupa!

A., 40; M., 43.--
Isus reče,
Who is he who builds a house on the wave of the sea? The world is [like] that, so do not take it as an abiding place.


A., 41; M., 44.--Some people said to Jesus:
Teach us one piece of knowledge for which God will love us.
He replied,
Hate the world, and God will love you.


A., 42; M., 45.--
Isus reče,
O company of the disciples, be pleased with what is worthless in the world along with welfare in religion, just as the people of the world are pleased with what is worthless in religion along with welfare in the world.


A., 43; M., 46.--The Messiah said,
O you who seek the world to be charitable with it, your leaving of it alone is more charitable.
And he said,
The least thing is such that looking after it occupies one to the exclusion of glorifying God, and glorifying God is greater and more important.


A., 45; M., 48.--It is related that the world was revealed to Jesus and he saw it in the form of a toothless old woman upon whom was every kind of ornament. Then he said to her,
How many have you married?
She replied,
I cannot count them.
He said,
Did they all die and leave you, or did they all divorce you?
She said,
Nay, I killed them all.
Then Isus reče,
It is a pity for the rest of your husbands. How do they not take warning from your past husbands how you have been destroying them one after another, and [how] are they not on their guard against you!


A., 47; M., 49.--
Isus reče,
Verily I say unto you, as a sick man looks at food and takes no delight in it because of the severity of the pain, so he who loves the world takes no delight in worship and does not discover its sweetness along with what he finds of love of the world. And verily I say unto you, if a riding-beast is not ridden and taken into service, it becomes intractable and its nature changes; similarly when hearts are not softened by the thought of death and the discipline of worship, they become hard and coarse. And verily I say unto you, as long as a skin is not torn or shrivelled it may nearly serve as a receptacle for honey; similarly hearts, as long as desires do not tear them, or greed defile them, or comfort harden them, may be vessels for wisdom.


A., 48; M., 50.--
Isus reče,
He who seeks after the world is like one who drinks sea-water; the more he drinks the more his thirst increases, until it kills him.


A., 50; M., 52.--
Isus reče,
In wealth there are calamities: that one should get it unlawfully.
Someone interrupted,
Suppose one gets it lawfully?
Then he said,
He may apply it unlawfully.
The other said,
But suppose he applies it lawfully?
Then he said,
Its management occupies him to the neglect of God.


A., 60; M., 57.--
Isus reče,
Fine clothing is vanity of heart.


A., 71; M., 62.--It is related that the Messiah passed in his wandering a man asleep wrapped up in his cloak; then he wakened him and said,
O sleeper, arise and glorify God.
Then the man said,
What do you want from me? Verily I have abandoned the world to its people.
So he said to him,
Sleep, then, my friend.


A., 72.--The Messiah said,
With difficulty does a rich man enter heaven.


A., 73; M., 18.--The Messiah said,
Verily I love poverty and hate comfort.
And the dearest of names to him was that he should be called,
O poor one.


A., 74; M., 63.--The Messiah said,
Do not look at the wealth of the people of this world, for the splendour of their wealth takes away the light of your faith.


A., 79.--
Jesus sat down in the shade of someone's wall, and the owner of the wall made him get up. Then he said,
You have not made me get up; He who has made me get up is only He who was not pleased that I should be comfortable in the shade of the wall.


A., 113.--
Isus reče to the disciples,
It is astonishing how you work for this world, yet you receive provision in it without work; and how you do not work for the next world, yet you receive provision in it only with work.


A., 118 .--The Messiah said to the disciples,
I am he who has inverted the world on its face; so I have no wife to die and no house to be demolished.


A., 125.--
Jesus used to say,
The sweetness of this world is the bitterness of the next, and fine clothes are vanity of heart, meaning conceit and pride of heart; and fullness of the belly is abundance of passion, meaning its sustenance and its accumulation.


A., 126.--
Jesus lifted up a stone and asked,
Which of the two is dearer to you, this or a dînâr and a dirhem?
They replied,
A dînâr.
He said,
They are both alike to me.


A., 220.--
Jesus struck the ground with his hand and took up some of it and spread it out, and behold, he had gold in one of his hands and clay in the other. Then he said to his companions,
Which of them is sweeter to your hearts?
They said,
The gold.
He said,
They are both alike to me.


A., 193.--
Isus reče,
O Children of Israel, know that the relation of your present life to your future life is like the relation of the east to the west. The more you approach the east, the farther you are from the west; and the more you approach the west, the farther do you increase in distance from the east.


M., 19. There is no poor man poorer than I.

A., 53; M., 54.
O you learned men who are evil, you fast and pray and give alms, and do not do what you are commanded, and you teach what you do not perform.

What does it avail you to purify your skins while your hearts are filthy? Verily I say unto you, do not be like a sieve from which the good flour goes out and in which the siftings remain. Similarly you utter the decree from your mouths, while malice remains in your hearts.

O slaves of the world, how can he attain the next world whose desire is not fulfilled in this world and whose craving is not cut off from it? Verily I say unto you, your hearts will weep for your deeds. You have put the world under your tongues and [good] deeds under your feet. Verily I say unto you, you have spoiled your next life, for the welfare of the present world is dearer to you than the welfare of the next. So what men are greater losers than you, if you only knew it!

Woe to you! What does it avail a dark house if a lamp is placed on its roof when inside is black darkness? Similarly it will not avail you that the light of knowledge should be in your mouths when your inner parts are waste and uncultivated respecting it.

O slaves of the world, you are not pious like slaves, or honourable like freemen. The world will soon uproot you and throw you on your faces, then it will overturn you on your nostrils.

A., 61; M., 58. Isus reče,
Why do you come to me wearing monks' clothing while your hearts are the hearts of ravenous wolves? Put on king's clothing and mortify your hearts with fear.


A., 161.--
Jesus, son of Mary said,
Be ashamed before God in your secret affairs, as you are ashamed before Him in your public affairs.


A., 197.--
Isus reče,
O companies of jurists, you have sat on the road of the life to come, but you have not walked so that you might reach it, nor have you allowed anyone to pass you to it; so woe to him who is beguiled by you!


A., 216.
Woe to you, slaves of the world! What use is the spreading of the sun's light to a blind man when he does not see it? Similarly the abundance of a learned man's knowledge is of no use to him when he does not act according to it.

How many fruits of trees are there, yet all of them are not useful and are not eaten! And how many learned men are there, yet all of them do not profit from what they learn!

So be on your guard against the false learned men who wear woollen clothing and bend down their heads to the earth, glancing under their eyebrows as wolves glance.

Their speech disagrees with their action. Who plucks grapes from thorns and figs from colocynth? Similarly the speech of a false learned man produces only falsehood.

----------
Hamza Yusuf, Walk on Water: The Wisdom of Jesus from Traditional Arabic Sources
----------

Do not, like lords, look at the faults of others. Rather, like servants, look at your own faults.

Work for God and not for your stomachs. Look at the birds: they rise up at dawn and enter into the evening having neither planted nor harvested, yet God provides for them.

Beware of the luxuries of this world, and fear them, for the luxuries of this world are filth in the sight of God.

It is of no use to know something if one does not act upon it. In truth, an abundance of knowledge only increases one in pride if one does not act accordingly.

Isus reče:
Love of this world is the source of every wrong action, and there is much harm in wealth.
They asked:
“What is its harm?”
Jesus replied:
“Its possessor is never safe from pride and arrogance.”
They said:
“What if he is free of those two? Is there still harm?”
Jesus responded:
“Yes, for by nurturing his wealth, he is diverted from the remembrance of God.”

Once Jesus and his disciples were outside the temple of Solomon. Disciples said:
“O Messiah of God, look at the House of God! What could be finer?”
Jesus replied:
“Amen. Amen. But I say to you that God will not leave one stone of this House standing. Indeed, God will destroy it because of the misdeeds of its people. God does not build anything of worth with gold or silver, nor stones. Righteous hearts are more beloved to God than these stones.”

Love of this world and love of the next world can never reside in the heart of a believer simultaneously, just as fire and water cannot be contained in a single vessel.

Woe to the possessor of this world, since he must die and leave the world behind. He places his hope in it and is deceived. He trusts it and is forsaken.
